If they couldn't step into that kind of a position,
then we were competitive because they wanted to go
to a university to work. And we had some people from
Lamar and other universities in Texas that were
interested in coming on board with us. So we were
probably in between, probably in between the the
Southwest Texas, Lamar, and lower than the
University of Texas, Michigan, and Columbia. We
were probably in between. Do you remember some
steps of accomplishment that in hindsight you now
realize were key steps of progress during those
early years? Yeah, I think this block program
began to blossom and we would eventually begin to
see what was called a professional senior
semester program where students would have an
increased amount of time in student teaching. But
they didn't have to worry about going off to other
departments for courses. They could take this as a
block and they could do a lot of their work out in the
public school setting and almost spend, after the
first, say, six weeks on campus, they could almost
spend the entire day, five days a week out in the
public school setting, finishing coursework,
doing student teaching, and so forth. And that
program, I thought, was very good. It gave them an
edge. Any number of personnel from public school
systems were telling us over and over, they wanted
our students because they liked what they were
getting. If they ever got one of our students, they
were back for more because I think that gave them an
edge being out in the public school setting for
that length of time instead of just going out,
running out and teaching a course or teaching
classes for an hour or two and then running back to
campus to take a course and then the next day
running out there and then coming back the next day
and taking a course. It was too fragmented. This
gave them the full-blown picture because, for
example, if they were doing all of this in the fall,
they had to go out before, even if we weren't open
yet at the university, they had to go out and
participate in the opening preparation days of
the school. They followed the public school
schedule, not our schedule, so to speak. And so
they really understood what education was all
about when they finished. And we were proud of
them. I'd say that was a key factor. I think another
two key factors that I really enjoyed watching
grow was the whole shift now when it came to the
doctoral program. particularly the
dissertation area. The dissertation became more
refined. It became more specialized, more
in-depth. And when our students finished, we
really felt confident that they go out and
whatever they were doing their research in, they
could step in and pick that up immediately and run
with it, regardless of where they went. And a lot of
them did end up going to major universities
because of that. The other major shift that I saw
that was good was the shift to paying more
attention to research grants, getting money from
federal sources, private sources to run their
research. When I first came, that was very, very
small. It wasn't a very large amount. Frank Hubert
and Earl Jones had hit on some pretty big programs,
creative application of technology to
education. But other than a couple of those kinds
of programs, the research dollars weren't
flowing in. I appreciated seeing that grow. Were
you in the department, was the department also
responsible for the work and practice teaching?
Did you all supervise that out in the local
schools? Yes. With which schools did you all most?
Just about every one of them in Bryan College
Station because we had so many. But primarily
these two school districts? Primarily here.
Eventually we, they didn't have enough enough
places and we had to start reaching out beyond here
to Somerville, Conroe, and then further down the
pike we even had to establish programs with as far
away as the Dallas area and so forth to get some How
difficult was it to establish a new relationship
with the school district? Pretty easy. Again, I
think that whole experience with Frank Hubert and
Paul Hensarling, people like Les Richardson and
so forth, paid off that way. I think these were...
people who were well known among the public school
people. And so they were pretty open about
discussing with us possibilities of placing
student teachers and then grabbing them. They
liked our student teachers too. Can you remember
any anecdotes or stories about where some Aggie
student teachers succeeded?
Where somebody had an example of the quality of one
of the student teachers from here, something they
did? No, that one doesn't come across to me. Now we
had lots of success as far as our doctoral students
going out. I had just the ones I chaired, for
example. One became vice president of McMurray
State. Another one became president of a junior
college. Wait, let's go back up. You said McMurray
State. Isn't it? McMurray, Abilene? Just
McMurray. McMurray. Okay, yeah, that's right.
Murray State is a Kentucky Teachers College.
That's right. Others that you can recall down
through the years and where they are now? Yeah, one
of the stars to come out of the program, I thought,
was Cecil Drain. Cecil had... been in the military
and was kind of predicted to go pretty far in the
military. He was already a major. when he came into
residence on his doctorate, and they funded, the
military funded him everything for three full
years at a major salary, and he got a promotion to
lieutenant colonel. He went back to San Antonio
and worked with the, at Fort Hood down there,
teaching in the field of anesthetism. And when he
retired from the military, he immediately
stepped in as head of the Department of Allied
Health and Anesthesia and so forth at Virginia
Commonwealth University. So he was really... And
he had written books. He had books that were the
Bible in the military as far as... operating room
functioning and anesthesia and so forth. He was
actually the author of the books that they were
using to train people with. So Cecil was a big star.
Public school wise, Libby Gardner comes to mind.
Libby finished her doctoral program with us and
stepped in as an assistant principal over in
Conroe and then became a principal and then
assistant superintendent. She's down in Conroe
ISD. There have been a lot of examples like that
where They've been pretty successful. Right. You
were department head for five years. Five years.
And so that takes us to 72 or three. Seventy-four.
Four. Yeah. Then you become the, what was the term?
Coordinator for higher education in the College
of Education. And you did that how long? Did that
until, let's see, 1980, when Chuck McCandless and
Gordon Eaton and Frank Vandiver were the three
administrative types at the university level.
And I'd been working with Frank Hubert trying to
get a center established for assisting faculty
and teaching assistants in teaching. And when
Dean Corrigan came in as the new Dean of College of
Ed, he picked up on that. and convinced people we
needed that. That's when McCandless headed up a
committee that I served on for about a year with
representatives from all the colleges. Out of
that grew the proposal to open the Texas A&M
University Center for Teaching Excellence.
Vandiver asked me if I would head that up. Then I
gave up the coordinating role of higher education
in the college because I would be carrying on my
responsibilities in the college as far as course
teaching and doctoral students, but then half my
time would be in the Center for Teaching
Excellence. I did that. From what, 1980 to,
must have been about 89, somewhere around there
that I stepped out of that role. Right, now Hubert
goes from being dean of education to chancellor.
Yes. Directly. Yeah. And he continued to function
until that change. In the college, and the college
continued to grow and so forth. Yes. Who else in the
70s, Williams being the president from late
November 1970 until his illness in 1976, Do you
remember any interaction with Williams, the
Williams, Calhoun, Hubert
leadership team? I never had that kind of, you
know, I wasn't in that loop, so I don't know what was
transpiring. But I did get acquainted with Jack
Kenny Williams, and... I can remember being
surprised. We'd played golf together out at
Briarcrest Country Club. members out of
Briarcrest and one day we got hooked up to play golf
and the next week I got a little note from Jack Kenny
Williams just saying, you know, I hope you're
enjoying hitting the little white ball, you know,
type of thing. And that impressed me that a
president would take time after meeting a faculty
member like that. He was marvelous with those
little notes. and they were always handwritten
and very much to the point but carried a message
because I remember treasuring a few of those also.
What was your impression of him as a human being?
Oh, only positive. He epitomized to me what a
university president should be. I think he had the
credentials for it, too, and the experience. He
had been, what, vice president at the University
of Texas at Tennessee at Knoxville? The system.
Chief academic officer for the system. Started
out at Clemson as an entry-level Southern history
faculty member and rose up to be what we would today
call provost and then commissioner of higher
education, but also was very, very, very
committed to helping the Southern historically
black land grant schools during his Clemson
years. And so all across the South, he was known by
that group of schools with great warmth as well.
And through that and his Clemson experience, he
had lots of Washington connections. Okay. Did you
feel that he was strongly supportive of
education? I did. I felt he was. And I think Frank
Humer felt that way, too. As far as I know, he
certainly was. And I felt that way too with Chuck
McCandless and Gordon Eaton when they were over in
the provost's office. That was just a feeling I had
that they were supportive. Do you remember any
examples of that? Well, the whole thing with the
Center for Teaching Excellence, I think Chuck
McCandless, and then when Gordon came in as the new
provost, Chuck was serving at the beginning of
that work as interim provost, as I recall. There
just seemed to be an agreement between them two
that this was something they wanted to see. I
always had the impression that they were very
positive toward education. I think during those
first 15 years or so, it just seemed like everyone
wanted this college of education to really be
successful. Even if you looked at the financial
allocations to the colleges, we were almost
always right smack in the middle. There were
always half the colleges that were getting less
support, it seemed like. Of course, engineering
and veterinary medicine, we're always getting a
lot of support and so forth. But we seemed to be
doing pretty well. And I attribute that to the
administration at the time, from the provost on
up, that they were supportive. Any examples you
remember of the positive actions of John Calhoun
or Mac Prescott when they were the chief academic
officers. I never really, I knew both and had
interacted because of committee functions that I
was on. But I never really again had, I guess again
by that time I was out of what you would call the loop
where you were now finding out who was saying what
and doing what and so forth. So I don't recall
anything that I can share with you in that area. My
mind just recalls a legend that I remember hearing
very, very, very indirectly about a faculty
member in education, and I know not what
department, who supposedly came with a thick
resume with all kinds of bells and whistles and was
verbally abusive to students, always putting
them down, always insulting them, and that as we
heard the story, two or three of the students got
his resume and went over to the library and and
found that nothing in the printed resume of his
publications and research matched up with what
they could find in the library. And that according
to this anecdote, they slid it under the door of the
dean of education, Frank Hubert. Hubert then
summoned the man to his office and asked him what
comment he had to make of it. And the fellow was gone
by... within a few hours. Does that ring a bell at
all? No, it really doesn't. And it may not have been
a true story, but it sounded... Well, that's
another one you really... I would like to hear what
Frank Hubert has to say. That's a great story. Let
me throw in this one, which does not relate to
education. In my years as dean of faculties, I
would ask each of the departments to let me have 30
minutes... of every prospective faculty
member's visit to the campus, during which time I
would try to tell them as much as I could and give
them as much positive information, factual
information, about what A&M really was and what it
hoped to become. And among things I would say is
that A&M is a comparatively conservative
institution, and I mean by that that it doesn't
change rapidly. We kind of go by tradition. And
that if they wanted a real liberal school, they
might not like us. And I would always assure the
departments I would in no way try to evaluate the
individuals. But it worked out that about once a
year, I encountered somebody that really seemed
to need some other review. And the one that I'm
thinking about now particularly, his resume said
he had a PhD from the University of Virginia. And I
mentioned having done research at the Alderman
Library. and he didn't know where it was. Well that
was the, that is the library. So then on the spur of
the moment I made up the names of three or four
non-existent people that I knew in the department
where he had done his dissertation. He knew all
three of them quite well. So I called the
department after he left the office and told them
what had happened. They then called the
University of Virginia and found that they had
never heard of this man who claimed to have a degree
from that school. Now you became a legend yourself
Haskell in that role because everyone
appreciated Your candor and the way you handled
candidates who were being interviewed. Thank
you. And it was. Thank you. You really became a
legend. People just admired that and respected
it. We're thankful to you for doing what you were
doing. All right, let's go near the... As Hubert
begins to reach... No, no, he didn't retire. He
moved upstairs. All right, as he goes up to be the
chancellor of the system... What did you and your
colleagues think about the Dean of Education
ascending that far up? Of course, we were very
positive. We liked that. But the day that
happened, and Frank Hubert talked to me later, and
he can clarify this for you, but There was a
committee meeting to be held like 9 o'clock that
morning in his office, the dean's conference
room. And we were all assembled up there. It may
have been a department heads meeting, for all I
know. We're all assembled up there. And Frank
Hubert, who is very prompt, wasn't there. And all
of a sudden, Peggy Ritchie, his secretary, comes
in. She says, Dr. Johnson? Dean Hubert said,
you're in charge of this meeting. OK. So I took
charge of the meeting. And then later, probably
that same day, the word trickled out that Frank
Hubert was going to become chancellor of the
system. And probably that same day, maybe, he
talked to me. And this was the story, I think, as I
best recall it. They were looking for a new
chancellor. And occasionally, they would call
Frank in and ask him for advice on how to go about
this. Did he have anyone in mind? What did he think
about person X or person Y? And apparently, this
had gone on a couple of times. And this particular
morning, he got a phone call from the chair of the
Board of Regents. And it went something like,
Frank, can you join us for breakfast at 7 o'clock?
And Frank said, yes. And he went into that meeting
thinking, oh, they've got somebody they want to
ask me about. And they said, Frank, we want you to be
the chancellor. And as I recall, he said, can I have
a couple of hours? I need to think about this. I need
to get home. Talk to Mary Julia, etc. And that's
probably when he called over and told Peggy, you
know, tell Glenn to take charge of that committee
meeting. And he went home and talked it over and
came back and accepted and became the chancellor.
And as he had done so many times remember I told you
earlier that thing I liked about Frank Hubert as I
did seem to see with Benson they delegated and and
almost immediately you know Frank Hubert was
saying okay you guys take over now the college I'm
going to be the chancellor And I'm going to do this
thing up here kind of thing. And you can kind of
review that with Frank. But that's my
recollection that he was completely taken aback
and caught completely off guard and surprised.
Who then took over the college even on an interim
basis? Oh, boy. Let's see. Was it Phil? I think it
may have been Phil Limbacher. who was the
assistant dean assistant dean and i think he
became interim dean and served in that role until
we brought corrigan in right now i chaired that
search committee wonderful job again you see you
did something now maybe you learned this from
frank hubert for all i know or benson or some of
these people But you made it very clear to us that we
were the ones who were going to carry the ball on
this and find out everything we could about these
candidates and that we would be really the ones who
would make the recommendation and you would take
that forward. You said you might have to go forward
with two or three and prioritize them, but we were
going to carry the ball on that. And I think as a
result of that, we ended up with a really fine dean
and Dean Corrigan because I think in the past there
had been times when it hadn't been handled that way
and new deans came in and they weren't that
successful as Corrigan was but I know in
Corrigan's case he was up against some pretty
stiff competition uh we had four candidates that
we brought in One was president of the
International Reading Association with a fine
credentials out of Indiana University, as I
recall, or Illinois, one of the two, probably
Illinois. The dean of education at Ohio State
University. The vice president for Stony Brook
and the New York system. And Corrigan, dean at the
University of Maryland. When I went through their
credentials, I ranked, ordered them, number one,
Dean at Ohio State, number two, Vice President
Stony Brook, number three, Corrigan Dean at
Maryland, and fourth, President of the
International Reading Association. By the time
we finished interviewing those four, there was no
doubt in my mind and in most of the committee
members that one person was a full cut above. the
other three, and that was Dean Corrigan. And so we
put our faith in him and said we want him. There was a
play. out of some of the representatives from
health and physical education for the vice
president from Stony Brook because he had, I
believe it was an undergraduate degree in health
and physical education. So they kept pushing,
Miller I believe was his name, they kept pushing
Miller for that job. But the overwhelming number
of us, as I recall, when you started counting hands
when they went up, it was just overwhelmingly
Corrigan. among things that i tried to do in that
and other searches was that each of the candidates
would go through exactly the same schedule
hopefully in the same order in the same places with
the same people present and that the interviewing
groups would try to compose and agree upon the
questions they were going to emphasize well in
advance so that they would be pretty well
measuring them the same way. And with Corrigan, I
particularly remember picking him up at the
airport about two hours after I had come back from
my first interview visit to the University of
Texas at El Paso as a potential president. And I was
worn out physically and emotionally. And I took
him to meet with the entire faculty. And when I sat
down, I thought, boy, Mr. Visitor, you better be
pretty good or I'll probably go to sleep. Well, of
course, by the end of an hour or two of him, I was wide
awake. and much impressed with him. But I felt very
optimistic at the start, and thank goodness that
optimism was fulfilled. What were his key
attributes? Well, I think personality was
overwhelmingly the key factor. He knew how to
relate to people. He was very empathetic.
understood education and the College of
Education, had been extremely active on the
national scene, was president of one of the major
organizations in education. Striking contrast
with Frank Hubert, as far as administrative style
goes, where Frank was more of a organization
delegate hold responsible type of thing Corrigan
was more of let's be friends and let's talk about
this and is there something I can do you know to move
this along etc etc and I think just as Rudder was the
right man for president of the University and then
Jack Kenny Williams in that order and as we
mentioned earlier Probably wouldn't have worked
if it had been reversed. So it was, I think, in the
case of Hubert and Corrigan. I'm not sure that the
Corrigan deanship would have been the right one
when we got started, but Hubert was. But I'm not
sure that Hubert would have been the right one
after the establishment of the college. Could
have been. But Corrigan was the right one to follow
Hubert and bring this personal touch and support
throughout the college. Now, Corrigan would
serve for? Ten years. Ten years. Okay, so he and
Hubert then both a long time. As far as you could
generalize, when Corrigan began his deanship, At
what level was our College of Education in
national or local or regional competition, and
where was it when he stepped away? I would say when
we opened our doors and after the first year or two,
we were probably in the bottom 20%, 25%
nationally.
And I would say by the time Hubert finished his
tenure and then Corrigan finished his tenure, we
had moved up to the top 25%. We're not a top 10. We're
not top 20. But at least to me.